15. Support vector machines and machine learning on documents

Improving classifier effectiveness has been an area of intensive machine-learning research over the last two decades, and this work has led to a new generation of state-of-the-art classifiers, such as support vector machines, boosted decision trees, regularized logistic regression, neural networks, and random forests. Many of these methods, including support vector machines(SVMs), the main topic of this chapter, have been applied with success to information retrieval problems, particularly text classification. An SVM is a kind of large-margin classifier: it is a vector space based machine learning
method where the goal is to find a decision boundary between two classes that is maximally far from any point in the training data (possibly discounting some points as outliers or noise).

We will initially motivate and develop SVMs for the case of two-class datasets that are separable by a linear classifier (Section 15.1), and then extend the model in Section 15.2 to non-separable data, multi-class problems, and non-linear models, and also present some additional discussion of SVM performance. The chapter then moves to consider the practical deployment of text classifiers in Section 15.3: what sorts of classifiers are appropriate when, and how can you exploit domain-specific text features in classification? Finally,
we will consider how the machine learning technology that we have been building for text classification can be applied back to the problem of learning how to rank documents in ad hoc retrieval (Section 15.4). While several machine learning methods have been applied to this task, use of SVMs has been prominent. Support vector machines are not necessarily better than other machine learning methods (except perhaps in situations with little training data), but they perform at the state-of-the-art level and have much current theoretical and empirical appeal.

15.1 Support vector machines: The linearly separable case

For two-class, separable training data sets, such as the one in Figure 14.8 (page 301), there are lots of possible linear separators. Intuitively, a decision boundary drawn in the middle of the void between data items of the two classes seems better than one which approaches very close to examples of one or both classes. While some learning methods such as the perceptron algorithm (see references in Section 14.7, page 314) find just any linear sepa-
rator, others, like Naive Bayes, search for the best linear separator according to some criterion. The SVM in particular defines the criterion to be looking for a decision surface that is maximally far away from any data point. This distance from the decision surface to the closest data point determines the margin of the classifier. This method of construction necessarily means that the decision function for an SVM is fully specified by a (usually small) subset of the data which defines the position of the separator. These points are referred to as the support vectors (in a vector space, a point can be thought of as a vector between the origin and that point). Figure 15.1 shows the margin and support vectors for a sample problem. Other data points play no part in determining the decision surface that is chosen.