The meaning of the term information retrieval can be very broad. Just getting
a credit card out of your wallet so that you can type in the card number
is a form of information retrieval. However, as an academic field of study,

INFORMATION information retrieval might be defined thus:
RETRIEVAL

Information retrieval (IR) is finding material (usually documents) of
an unstructured nature (usually text) that satisfies an information need
from within large collections (usually stored on computers).
As defined in this way, information retrieval used to be an activity that only

a few people engaged in: reference librarians, paralegals, and similar pro-
fessional searchers. Now the world has changed, and hundreds of millions

of people engage in information retrieval every day when they use a web
search engine or search their email.1

Information retrieval is fast becoming

the dominant form of information access, overtaking traditional database-
style searching (the sort that is going on when a clerk says to you: “I’m sorry,

I can only look up your order if you can give me your Order ID”).
IR can also cover other kinds of data and information problems beyond
that specified in the core definition above. The term “unstructured data”
refers to data which does not have clear, semantically overt, easy-for-a-computer
structure. It is the opposite of structured data, the canonical example of

which is a relational database, of the sort companies usually use to main-
tain product inventories and personnel records. In reality, almost no data

are truly “unstructured”. This is definitely true of all text data if you count
the latent linguistic structure of human languages. But even accepting that
the intended notion of structure is overt structure, most text has structure,

such as headings and paragraphs and footnotes, which is commonly repre-
sented in documents by explicit markup (such as the coding underlying web

1. In modern parlance, the word “search” has tended to replace “(information) retrieval”; the
term “search” is quite ambiguous, but in context we use the two synonymously.

Online edition (c)

2009 Cambridge UP

2 1 Boolean retrieval
pages). IR is also used to facilitate “semistructured” search such as finding a
document where the title contains Java and the body contains threading.
The field of information retrieval also covers supporting users in browsing

or filtering document collections or further processing a set of retrieved doc-
uments. Given a set of documents, clustering is the task of coming up with a

good grouping of the documents based on their contents. It is similar to ar-
ranging books on a bookshelf according to their topic. Given a set of topics,

standing information needs, or other categories (such as suitability of texts
for different age groups), classification is the task of deciding which class(es),
if any, each of a set of documents belongs to. It is often approached by first
manually classifying some documents and then hoping to be able to classify
new documents automatically.
Information retrieval systems can also be distinguished by the scale at
which they operate, and it is useful to distinguish three prominent scales.
In web search, the system has to provide search over billions of documents
stored on millions of computers. Distinctive issues are needing to gather
documents for indexing, being able to build systems that work efficiently
at this enormous scale, and handling particular aspects of the web, such as

the exploitation of hypertext and not being fooled by site providers manip-
ulating page content in an attempt to boost their search engine rankings,

given the commercial importance of the web. We focus on all these issues
in Chapters 19–21. At the other extreme is personal information retrieval. In
the last few years, consumer operating systems have integrated information
retrieval (such as Apple’s Mac OS X Spotlight or Windows Vista’s Instant

Search). Email programs usually not only provide search but also text clas-
sification: they at least provide a spam (junk mail) filter, and commonly also

provide either manual or automatic means for classifying mail so that it can

be placed directly into particular folders. Distinctive issues here include han-
dling the broad range of document types on a typical personal computer,

and making the search system maintenance free and sufficiently lightweight
in terms of startup, processing, and disk space usage that it can run on one
machine without annoying its owner. In between is the space of enterprise,
institutional, and domain-specific search, where retrieval might be provided for
collections such as a corporation’s internal documents, a database of patents,

or research articles on biochemistry. In this case, the documents will typi-
cally be stored on centralized file systems and one or a handful of dedicated

machines will provide search over the collection. This book contains tech-
niques of value over this whole spectrum, but our coverage of some aspects

of parallel and distributed search in web-scale search systems is compara-
tively light owing to the relatively small published literature on the details

of such systems. However, outside of a handful of web search companies, a

software developer is most likely to encounter the personal search and en-
terprise scenarios.